Disk Mounting – Attaching a storage device for use.
Disk Partition – Splitting a disk into logical sections.
Disk File System – Organizes files on storage devices.
EFS – Encrypting File System.
NFS – Network File System.
SFTP – SSH File Transfer Protocol.
SCP – Secure Copy Protocol.
    Answer
💾 Disk Management & File Systems

Disk management is the process of organizing, storing, accessing, and managing data on storage devices such as hard disks (HDDs), solid-state drives (SSDs), and network storage.

1. Disk Mounting
Definition

Disk Mounting is the process of attaching a storage device or partition to the Linux file system so that users can access its files and directories.

In Linux, every storage device must be mounted before it can be used.

Example

You plug in a USB drive. Linux mounts it to a directory such as:

/media/username/USB

After mounting, you can read, write, copy, and delete files on the USB drive.

Common Commands

Check mounted disks:

mount

Mount a disk:

sudo mount /dev/sdb1 /mnt

Unmount a disk:

sudo umount /mnt
Real-World Example

A system administrator mounts a new 500 GB hard disk to the /data directory to store application logs.

2. Disk Partition
Definition

A Disk Partition is the process of dividing a physical disk into multiple logical sections.

Each partition behaves like a separate disk and can have its own file system.

Why Partition a Disk?
Separate operating system and user data
Improve data organization
Support multiple operating systems
Simplify backup and recovery
Example

A 1 TB hard disk can be divided into:

Partition	Size	Purpose
Partition 1	100 GB	Operating System
Partition 2	400 GB	Applications
Partition 3	500 GB	User Data
Common Commands

Display partitions:

lsblk

or

sudo fdisk -l
Real-World Example

A company server has separate partitions for the operating system, databases, and backup files.

3. Disk File System
Definition

A File System is the method used by an operating system to organize, store, retrieve, and manage files on a storage device.

Without a file system, the operating system cannot understand how data is stored on the disk.

Common File Systems
File System	Operating System
ext4	Linux
XFS	Linux
NTFS	Windows
FAT32	Windows, USB Drives
exFAT	Windows, macOS, Linux
Functions
Organizes files
Stores file names
Maintains permissions
Tracks free and used disk space
Retrieves files quickly
Example

Linux typically uses the ext4 file system for its partitions.

4. EFS (Encrypting File System)
Definition

Encrypting File System (EFS) is a Windows feature that encrypts files and folders to protect them from unauthorized access.

Encryption converts readable data into an unreadable format that only authorized users can decrypt.

Features
Protects sensitive files
Encryption is automatic after enabling EFS
Only authorized users can access encrypted data
Example

A company employee encrypts confidential salary documents using EFS to prevent unauthorized access.

Advantages
Data security
Easy to use
Integrated with Windows
5. NFS (Network File System)
Definition

Network File System (NFS) is a protocol that allows computers to access files stored on another computer over a network as if they were local files.

Features
File sharing across Linux and UNIX systems
Centralized storage
Multiple users can access shared files
Example

An organization stores project files on a central server. Employees access the shared files using NFS instead of copying them to individual computers.

Advantages
Easy file sharing
Centralized management
Efficient collaboration
6. SFTP (SSH File Transfer Protocol)
Definition

SFTP is a secure protocol used to transfer files between computers over an encrypted SSH (Secure Shell) connection.

Unlike FTP, SFTP encrypts both data and login credentials.

Features
Secure file transfer
Encryption using SSH
Supports authentication
Allows upload, download, rename, and delete operations
Default Port

Port 22

Example

A developer securely uploads application files to a Linux server using SFTP.

Advantages
Secure communication
Data encryption
Safe for internet file transfers
7. SCP (Secure Copy Protocol)
Definition

SCP is a command-line utility used to securely copy files between local and remote systems using SSH.

Like SFTP, SCP encrypts data during transfer.

Default Port

Port 22

Syntax

Copy a local file to a remote server:

scp file.txt user@server:/home/user/

Copy a file from a remote server to the local computer:

scp user@server:/home/user/file.txt .
Example

A system administrator copies a backup file from a production server to a local computer using SCP.

Advantages
Fast
Secure
Easy to use
Uses SSH encryption
Difference Between SFTP and SCP
SFTP	SCP
File Transfer Protocol	Secure Copy Utility
Interactive file management	Simple file copying
Supports upload, download, rename, delete	Mainly copies files
Suitable for regular file management	Suitable for quick file transfers
Uses SSH (Port 22)	Uses SSH (Port 22)

